the titanic story is one that will live
on for ages
having inspired movies documentaries and
exhibitions
you might think you know everything
there is to know about the great
unsinkable ship
that was sent to a watery grave by an
iceberg
[Music]
but did you know it had two sister ships
or that events leading up to and the day
of its maiden voyage
actually sealed the ship's fate rms
titanic
was built by a british shipping company
called white star line
they focused on building comfortable and
reliable ships
however they found themselves in heavy
competition with a north
based company called canard which had
built the most sophisticated and
luxurious ships at the time
the mauritania and the lusitania the
mauritania
set a speed record that it held for 22
years
and the lusitania was renowned for its
luxurious interiors
white star line had their work cut out
for them if they wanted to beat their
rival
so in order to crush the competition the
chief executive of white star line
joseph bruce ismey commissioned the
creation of
three enormous ships the olympic the
titanic
and the gigantic masses of workers
started building the titanic at a
belfast
ireland shipyard in march 1909.
and managed to complete it three years
later rms titanic
at 882 feet long and as tall as a
17-story building
was the largest movable human-made
object of the time
people marveled at its creation and 100
000 people attended the unveiling the
ship
was the height of luxury its interior
was inspired by the ritz hotel in london
it had all the amenities a gym a pool
a turkish bath a barber shop and its own
newspaper
it's modest by today's cruise ship
standards but keep in mind
that it's really impressive for the
early 1900s
the wealthiest passenger was john jacob
astor iv
who had a net worth of around 2 billion
dollars by today's standards
and his wife came along for the ride
there was also industrialist benjamin
guggenheim
the heiress margaret molly brown and
macy's department store co-owner isidor
strauss and his wife ida
they probably paid a pretty penny for
their trip
given that the most expensive tickets
would be about ninety seven
thousand dollars today most of the
passengers were third class though
there were around seven hundred of them
and they paid just
twenty dollars to make the transatlantic
crossing
the ship was big beautiful and
innovative for its time
however there were some logistical
mishaps that could have been prevented
the titanic only carried 20 lifeboats
which altogether could hold 1178 people
that meant there were seats available
for only a third of the people on board
to us today having enough lifeboats for
everyone is a no-brainer
but the titanic actually carried four
more boats than was required by law back
then
even if you ask a ten-year-old they'll
tell you exactly what took down the
gigantic ship
however some survivors of the sinking
legend would beg to differ
here's one of their stories and surprise
it has
nothing to do with an iceberg
armenian publicist vodkanock byrate was
25 years old in the spring of 1912.
he described what happened on his
journey to america on the most
famous ship in the world in his memoirs
vodka nach lived a long and happy life
and
as a great storyteller he shared what
happened to him many times
interestingly he's never mentioned an
iceberg hitting the titanic
and always spoke about an explosion if
what he said was true
something must have caused that huge
explosion
it could have been a fire and quite a
lot of people actually believed that
theory
saying that coal was burning in the
ship's hall
that fire would have started long before
the ship's departure
and there was simply no way to put it
out titanic must have left with the fire
still ongoing
and the flames weakening the hull so
much it couldn't survive its meeting
with the iceberg
supporters of this theory used pictures
of the titanic leaving the docks for
evidence
pointing to a huge dark mark on the hull
even if that's true though it's still
not obvious whether the fire led to an
explosion
and supporters of this theory don't deny
there was an iceberg
another theory that explained the
explosion claimed that there was a
german u-boat involved in the sinking of
the titanic
the armenian rider was in fact not the
only survivor who mentioned they heard
explosion
sounds coming from somewhere deep in the
bowels of the ship
and they'd also claim they'd seen a
searchlight coming from some
ship shortly after titanic had sunk
it wasn't a vessel hurrying to the
rescue so it could have
actually been a submarine that surfaced
to see what it had done to the legendary
ship
this theory is highly unlikely though
for several reasons
first of all as you know the titanic
sank in 1912
which was still a time of peace
no country in the world would dare to
kill thousands of people
and provoke other countries for no
reason
secondly a u-boat from europe couldn't
have gone that far in those times
and it couldn't have been stationed in
that region either it simply wouldn't
have survived there for a long time
[Music]
finally hitting a target that's moving
quickly at nighttime
is still a challenge for submariners
even today
and it was basically impossible in 1912
it's hard to tell what could have made a
man who survived such a tragedy
remember things that did or didn't
happen
let's hope that in the future scientists
will be able to explain
all the mysteries surrounding the
titanic
if you saw james cameron's famous 1997
film
based on these events then you might
remember the character
molly brown being one of the first to
make it out on a lifeboat
and trying to convince the quartermaster
that they should row back to get more
survivors
well molly brown was in fact a real
person
and there are accounts that she actually
did do this
the brave and selfless woman earned
herself the nickname
the unsinkable molly brown and after the
ship went down
she tried her best to get as many
passengers as she could into the
lifeboats
but the philanthropist's good work
didn't end there
after surviving the catastrophe and
being rescued by the rms carpathia
brown got together with other first
class survivors
and put together an organization to help
second and third class survivors
with counseling and other basic needs
she also campaigned for education of the
poor
and for women's rights in 1914
she even ran for the senate and after
the first world war
the missouri native went to help rebuild
war-torn france
she was truly a remarkable and inspiring
woman
there was also author journalist and
teacher lawrence beasley
beasley was a second class passenger
from the uk
who was busy reading a book in his cabin
when the ship hit the iceberg
he asked a steward what had happened and
the steward tried to assure him that it
was nothing to worry about
luckily beasley decided to go up to a
deck and since there were no women or
children around
he was told to jump into lifeboat number
13 just before it was launched
he later wrote a book that brought him a
lot of success called
the loss of the ss titanic in this book
beasley talks about his experience in
great detail
another survivor was violet constance
jessup
who was a stewardess on the ship jessup
hadn't planned to work on the titanic
until her friends convinced her to apply
for the job
she was in her cabin almost asleep in
her bunk when the titanic hit the
iceberg
she was immediately ordered to go and
help on deck
she was then put into lifeboat 16 along
with a baby to take care of
after eight hours afloat in the ocean
another ship
saved the passengers of this lifeboat
and the baby was reunited with its
mother
jessup's survival skills were put to the
test yet again
when she was on board the hmhs britannic
which also sank four years later in
1916.
ironically this was a sister ship of the
titanic
and also owned by white star line
the actress dorothy gibson most famous
for her role in the 1912 movie
saved from the titanic was actually one
of the survivors of the catastrophe
she and her mother were coming back to
the us on board the titanic after
vacationing in europe
the two had been playing bridge with
some friends when the ship struck the
iceberg
they escaped together in the half empty
lifeboat number seven
but nearly sank again when one of the
other survivors
noticed a hole in the boat luckily they
were able to plug it up with some
clothes
not long after gibson arrived in new
york aboard the carpathia
her agent convinced her to star in a
movie about the titanic sinking
she wrote the script herself and wore
the same clothes in the movie
that she did on the night of the
disaster the film came out
just a month after the tragedy dorothy
later gave up her acting career to work
in the metropolitan opera
she spent her last years in paris what a
life
one of the most heartbreaking outcomes
of the titanic sinking
was that it tore families apart the
navrato brothers
master michael marcel and master edmund
roger
were just toddlers when they boarded the
titanic with their father
as the titanic was sinking he put his
boys in the last
lifeboat with the final words my
children
when your mother comes for you as she
surely will tell her that i loved her
dearly
and still do tell her i expected her to
follow us
so that we might all live happily
together in the peace and freedom of the
new world
unfortunately little michael and edmund
didn't speak english at all
so it took quite some time to find their
relatives
their mother eventually saw them in the
newspaper and the family reunited
a month after the sinking the brothers
grew up to have completely different
lives
michael married his colleague sweetheart
became a professor of philosophy
and spent the rest of his life in
montpelier edmond
also got married and worked as an
architect and builder
ava miriam hart was only seven years old
when she boarded the titanic with her
parents
according to ava her mother couldn't
sleep at all the whole time she was on
board
because she'd had a really bad
premonition about the trip
while the titanic was sinking ava's
father ran to their cabin
wrapped ava in a blanket and placed his
wife and daughter
in lifeboat number 14. the last thing he
told ava was
hold mommy's hand and be a good girl
ava went on to do many things throughout
her life she was a singer in australia
and a very outspoken activist when it
came to the whole titanic ordeal
she even wrote an autobiography called
shadow of the titanic
a survivor story after the titanic sank
many new procedures were established
with the hope of preventing similar
disasters
one of the first was the establishment
of regular ice patrols in that region of
the north atlantic
in the early days this meant guys with
binoculars freezing their noses off in
boats and planes
but fortunately today is not 100 years
ago
another reason today is better than a
century ago is that our iceberg
detection has gotten a lot more
sophisticated
the united states coast guard and
canadian eye service
regularly patrol the area with
radar-equipped hc-130 aircraft to scan
for any icebergs coming too close to
major shipping routes
with the added assistance of global
positioning satellites
and reports from passing ships the two
agencies can provide daily updates on
the position of icebergs in the north
atlantic
individual vessels also have a much
easier time spotting icebergs in their
vicinity
thanks to technology such as radar and
sonar becoming commonplace
these advancements have done a great
deal to make sea travel a lot safer
but they aren't foolproof accidents can
still happen
so it's a good thing large vessels are
now required
to carry enough lifeboats for everyone
on board and the crews receive
training in proper evacuation procedures
modern ships are also required to have a
radio operator on duty at all
times that's good for several reasons
one of them being that no one wants to
be the guy who slept through a crisis
the captain of the californian got fired
over missing the titanic's call
and he hadn't even been breaking any
rules emergency radio calls have been
standardized to a greater extent than
they were in 1912.
additionally gps tracking means that if
a ship needs help
responders will know precisely where the
trouble is going down
pardon the pun rescue efforts are also
much more coordinated than they would
have been in the early 20th century
the coast guard maintains a variety of
emergency response vehicles
ranging from small boats and helicopters
to large
ships and planes they're also better
able to coordinate with
and dispatch help from other civilian
and military traffic in the area
let's see together just what kind of a
luxury vessel
it was first of all of course
just look at the size of her
the titanic was one of the biggest ocean
liners of her time
rivaled only by her sister ships olympic
and britannic
[Music]
even by today's standard she's quite
impressive
but let's not stay outside for too long
and proceed on board
[Music]
we climb up to the b deck where most of
the first class passengers enter the
ship it was the second highest deck
the gangways were on the port uh left
side
but entrances mirrored each other on
both sides we find ourselves in a foyer
with three doors
the one on our right opens on a private
promenade from which
vip passengers could enjoy the ocean
view with the comfort of lounge chairs
all on our own
and the two doors in the front lead to
the grand staircase
the view immediately stunned everyone
and no surprise here
the staircase was the pride and glory of
the titanic
this magnificence was made of oak and
wrought iron
decorated with intricate patterns all
made by hand
its centerpiece was simply mesmerizing a
masterful wooden carving with a clock in
it
and above there was a beautiful glass
dome meant to create an illusion of
daylight
the stairs led to other decks but if you
didn't feel like walking
you could go around a bit for the three
elevators they would take you to decks
from
a to e those were reserved for the first
and second class passengers
while the third class had most of the f
deck and part of
g deck for themselves
the four doors in the corners of the
stairway hall led to the passenger
cabins
surprisingly the corridors were pretty
narrow and people almost had to squeeze
as if they met each other on their way
to or from their rooms
only two persons could go abreast in
there
let's turn to the right from the
entrance and walk down one of the
corridors
there's something i want to show you
first of all on the right
is the entrance to the huge suite
consisting of three connected cabins
this is where the notorious joseph bruce
is may lived
the chairman of white star line that
owned the ship b-52 was a sitting room
where he received guests and talked
business
b-54 and b-56 were two bedrooms
with a bathroom between them
further down the corridor on both left
and right resided other distinguished
passengers
including benjamin guggenheim in b82
you might remember him from the 1997
movie
and when we get to the end of the
hallway look to your left
familiar isn't it yep titanic had not
one but
two grand staircases one in the
forecastle which we saw earlier
and one in the aft
now on our left is a reception room
where passengers could wait in comfort
before the restaurant's door is opened
and behind the door
right there is cafe parisian
decorated with live vines and having big
windows
it was designed for first and second
class passengers to have refreshment
while enjoying the wonderful views it
was one of the many
innovations on the luxury ocean liner
right next to the cafe was the
restaurant where the wealthier
passengers had their meals
there were 138 seats overall and
passengers could book them in advance
the menu hung right before the entrance
and guests were also accommodated with
coat hangers and hat hooks
so they could leave their outerwear in a
recess outside the main dining hall
each table was decorated with a vase of
live flowers
and waiters were always at the ready
when the guests came in